add recipes 1.1.0 post (#697)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/recipes-1-1-0/index.Rmd

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [package] 
tags: [tidymodels, recipes]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [x] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [x] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [x] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [x] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [x] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [x] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [x] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [x] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [x] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

We're thrilled to announce the release of [recipes](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/) 1.1.0. recipes lets you create a pipeable sequence of feature engineering steps.

You can install it from CRAN with:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
install.packages("recipes")
```

This blog post will go over some of the bigger changes in this release.

You can see a full list of changes in the [release notes](https://github.com/tidymodels/recipes/releases/tag/v1.1.0).

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
library(recipes)
```

> ## ptype information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Column type checking
```

This title seems more focused on implementation than the feature

> A [longtime issue](https://github.com/tidymodels/recipes/issues/793) in recipes comes from the fact that recipes didn't keep a [prototype](https://vctrs.r-lib.org/articles/type-size.html) (ptype) of the data it was specified with. This would cause unexpected things to happen or uninformative error messages to appear if different data was used to `prep()` than was used to specify it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [longtime issue](https://github.com/tidymodels/recipes/issues/793) in recipes comes from the fact that recipes didn't keep a [prototype](https://vctrs.r-lib.org/articles/type-size.html) (ptype) of the data it was specified with. This would cause unexpected things to happen or uninformative error messages to appear if different data was used to `prep()` than was used to specify it in `recipe()`.
```

> In the below example, we specify a recipe where `x2` starts by being a character vector, but the recipe is prepped where `x2` is a numeric vector. This didn't produce any problems before,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the below example, we specify a recipe where `x2` starts by being a character vector, but the recipe is prepped where `x2` is a numeric vector. This didn't produce any problems before
```

"This didn't produce any problems before" makes it sound like we made an issue out of nothing. Could you show the code that previously resulted in an uninformative error?

Author: Rephrasing this a bit. 

> This didn't produce any problems before

replacing "problems" with "any warnings or errors"

The example below was an example of code that didn't throw a error, when it should have

``` r

> data_template <- tibble(outcome = rnorm(10), x1 = rnorm(10), x2 = sample(letters, 10, T))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data_template <- tibble(
  outcome = rnorm(10), 
  x1 = rnorm(10), 
  x2 = sample(letters, 10, T)
)
```

89 characters, gets a newline in my browser

rec <- recipe(outcome ~ ., data_template) %>%
  step_bin2factor(all_numeric_predictors())

data_training <- tibble(outcome = rnorm(1000), x1 = rnorm(1000), x2 = rnorm(1000))

prep(rec, training = data_training)
#> 
#> ── Recipe ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
#> 
#> ── Inputs
#> Number of variables by role
#> outcome:   1
#> predictor: 2
#> 
#> ── Training information
#> Training data contained 1000 data points and no incomplete rows.
#> 
#> ── Operations
#> • Dummy variable to factor conversion for: x1 | Trained
```

> but now we get an error detailing how the data is different:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we get an error detailing how the data is different:
```

```{r}
#| error: true
data_template <- tibble(outcome = rnorm(10), x1 = rnorm(10), x2 = sample(letters, 10, T))

rec <- recipe(outcome ~ ., data_template) %>%
  step_bin2factor(all_numeric_predictors())

data_training <- tibble(outcome = rnorm(1000), x1 = rnorm(1000), x2 = rnorm(1000))

prep(rec, training = data_training)
```

> In addition, we are exporting the two helper functions `recipes_ptype()` and `recipes_ptype_validate()` to extract and validate ptype information for a given recipe.
> 
> ```{r}
> recipes_ptype(rec)
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

These functions are marked `@keywords internal`--I'd recommend we not publicize them in the blog post.

Note that recipes created before version 1.1.0 don't contain any ptype information, and will not undergo checking. Rerunning the code to specify the recipe will add ptype information to the recipe.

> ## Input checking in recipe()

Reviewer 2: And similar in other headings

> Every recipe you create start with a call to `recipe()`. We have relaxed the requirements of data frames, while increasing the feedback when something goes wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every recipe you create starts with a call to `recipe()`. We have relaxed the requirements of data frames, while making feedback more helpful when something goes wrong.
```

"Every recipe you create start with a call to `recipe()`" would be a great intro to the previous section, as it was assumed knowledge there. :)

The data was previously passed through `model.frame()` inside the recipe, which restricted what could be handled. Previously prohibited input included data frames with list-columns or [sf](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/) data frames. Both of these are now supported, as long as they are a `data.frame` object.

```{r}
data_listcolumn <- tibble(
  y = 1:4,
  x = list(1:3, 4:6, 3:1, 1:10)
)

recipe(y ~ ., data = data_listcolumn)
```

```{r}
library(sf)
pathshp <- system.file("shape/nc.shp", package = "sf")
data_sf <- st_read(pathshp, quiet = TRUE)

recipe(AREA ~ ., data = data_sf)
```

We are excited to see what people can do with these new options.

> Another way to specify a recipe is to use `add_role()` and `update_role()`. But if you are not careful, you can end up in situations where the same variable is labeled as both the outcome and predictor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another way to specify a recipe is to use `add_role()` and `update_role()`. But if you were not careful, you could end up in situations where the same variable is labeled as both the outcome and predictor.
```
Could you smooth the transition here a bit? Something about how the call to `recipe()` specifies the roles but you can change these later?

```{r}
#| error: true

> # didn't use to throw a warning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# didn't used to throw a warning
```

...though this may make more sense as text above the code block

recipe(mtcars) |>
  update_role(everything(), new_role = "predictor") |>
  add_role("mpg", new_role = "outcome")
```

> This specific problem can be dealt with using `update_role()` instead of `add_role()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This error can be avoided by using `update_role()` instead of `add_role()`.
```

```{r}
recipe(mtcars) |>
  update_role(everything(), new_role = "predictor") |>
  update_role("mpg", new_role = "outcome")
```

## Long formulas in recipe()

Related to the changes we saw above, we now fully support very long formulas without hitting a `C stack usage` error.

```{r}
data_wide <- matrix(1:10000, ncol = 10000)
data_wide <- as.data.frame(data_wide)
names(data_wide) <- c(paste0("x", 1:10000))

long_formula <- as.formula(paste("~ ", paste(names(data_wide), collapse = " + ")))

recipe(long_formula, data_wide)
```

## Better error for misspelled argument names

If you have used recipes long enough you are very likely to have run into the following error:

``` r
recipe(mpg ~ ., data = mtcars) |>
  step_pca(all_numeric_predictors(), number = 4) |>
  prep()
#> Error in `step_pca()`:
#> Caused by error in `prep()`:
#> ! Can't rename variables in this context.
```

> and the first time you saw it, it didn't make much sense. Hopefully, you figured out that [step_pca()](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/step_pca.html) doesn't have a `number` argument, and instead uses `num_comp` to determine the number of principal components to return. This confusion will be a thing of the past as we now include this improved error message:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first time you saw it, it didn't make much sense. Hopefully, you figured out that [step_pca()](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/step_pca.html) doesn't have a `number` argument, and instead uses `num_comp` to determine the number of principal components to return. This confusion will be a thing of the past as we now include this improved error message:
```

```{r}
#| error: true
recipe(mpg ~ ., data = mtcars) |>
  step_pca(all_numeric_predictors(), number = 4) |>

>   prep()

Reviewer: Noting that this error message has a pluralization issue.

> The following argument was specified but do not exist:

Should be

> The following argument was specified but does not exist:

Author: added issue here https://github.com/tidymodels/recipes/issues/1345

```

## Quality of life increases in step_dummy()

I would imagine that one of the most used steps is `step_dummy()`. We have improved the errors and warnings it spits out when things go sideways.

> If you apply `step_dummy()` to a variable that contains a lot of levels, it will produce a lot of columns, which depending on the size of your data won't fit in memory. This can lead to the following error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you apply `step_dummy()` to a variable that contains a lot of levels, it will produce a lot of columns, and the resulting object may not fit in memory. This can lead to the following error:
```

Many short sections in the original sentence—pared back a couple conditionals.

```r
data_id <- tibble(
  id = as.character(1:100000), 
  x1 = rnorm(100000), 
  x2 = sample(letters, 100000, TRUE)
)

recipe(~ ., data = data_id) |>
  step_dummy(all_nominal_predictors()) |>
  prep()
#> Error: vector memory exhausted (limit reached?)
```

Instead, you now get a more helpful error message.

```{r}
#| error: true
data_id <- tibble(
  id = as.character(1:100000), 
  x1 = rnorm(100000), 
  x2 = sample(letters, 100000, TRUE)
)

recipe(~ ., data = data_id) |>
  step_dummy(all_nominal_predictors()) |>
  prep()
```

Likewise, you will get helpful errors if `step_dummy()` gets a `NA` or unseen values

```{r}
data_train <- tibble(x = c("a", "b"))
data_unseen <- tibble(x = "c")

rec_spec <- recipe(~., data = data_train) %>%
  step_dummy(x) %>%
  prep()

rec_spec %>%

>   bake(data_unseen)

Reviewer 2: The resulting warning has a stray `\` in it, before the word `before`: 

> #> Warning: ! There are new levels in `x`: "c".
#> ℹ Consider using step_novel() (`?recipes::step_novel()`) \ before
#>   `step_dummy()` to handle unseen values.

Author: fixed in https://github.com/tidymodels/recipes/pull/1346

cheating and rendering with that version to avoid this
